Module 4 Challenge - Written Report

    This data set includes math and reading scores for 39,170 students from 15 different schools in the city’s school district. Analyzing this data set shows some interesting insights about test scores, such as learning that in general, students tend to perform better in reading than they do in math. We can also see that average math and reading scores do not fluctuate much from grade to grade (most stay within a point or two), but that they do fluctuate a lot more from school to school. More importantly, using this data set we can compare average math and reading scores across all of the schools, which can help us determine which factors might affect test scores the most. The factors we can look at are school type, school size, and school spending.

    When looking at school type, one conclusion you can draw from this data is that in general, charter schools outperform district schools. When you look at “Percent Overall Passing,” the top 5 schools are all charter schools, and the bottom 5 schools are all district schools. In addition, charter schools scored an average of 83.47 in math and 83.90 in reading, whereas district schools scored much lower with an average of 76.96 in math and 80.97 in reading.

    Based on school size, the next conclusion is that medium schools tend to perform better than both small and large schools. The medium schools had the highest average math score and the greatest percentage of passing math, reading, and overall. The only metric that medium schools did not perform highest in was average reading score, which was 83.86, compared to small schools which scored an average of 83.93 in reading. These values are very close, though, so we can still say that overall medium schools tend to score higher and have the highest passing rates. It is not surprising that medium schools tend to perform better than large schools, because we have already determined that district schools perform the worst, and all of the district schools fall into the large school category because they all have between 2000 and 5000 students.

    Finally, as spending increases, scores decrease. You might expect that the more money a school has, the better the students perform, but this data says the opposite. The lowest spending bracket of $585 or less per student had the best math and reading scores and the highest passing percentages. The highest spending bracket of $645-$680 per student had the worst math and reading scores and the lowest passing percentages.

    Overall, this data might be telling us that if you want to increase student performance, spending more money might not get the result you desire. Maybe the small and medium schools have smaller class sizes. When you have a smaller class size you can get more access to your teacher, which can lead to greater comprehension of class material. This would just be an assumption though, until we can see test scores compared to classroom sizes.
